Pfizer says Covid vaccine is 95% effective and will seek emergency approval (news composite, November 2020)

Pfizer and its German partner BioNTech announced Wednesday that their coronavirus vaccine was 95 percent effective, a striking rate of protection that was consistent across age groups and ethnicities, and that they would apply within days for emergency authorization to begin distributing it.

The companies said a final analysis of their large-scale clinical trial found that the vaccine, which requires two shots given three weeks apart, had an efficacy rate of 95 percent — even better than the preliminary finding of more than 90 percent they had announced just over a week ago.

The vaccine was also more than 94 percent effective in adults over 65, a particularly vulnerable group. Among 10 people who had severe cases of Covid-19 after receiving at least one shot, only one had been given the vaccine.

"The study results mark an important step in this historic eight-month journey to bring forward a vaccine capable of helping to end this devastating pandemic," said Dr. Albert Bourla, Pfizer's chairman and chief executive.

The companies said they planned to submit a request to the Food and Drug Administration for an emergency use authorization within days and expected to produce up to 50 million doses this year and up to 1.3 billion doses in 2021.

The vaccine uses messenger RNA, or mRNA, a technology that has never been approved for use in any vaccine before. The mRNA instructs cells to make a protein that resembles the spike protein on the surface of the coronavirus, training the immune system to recognize and fight the actual virus.

Side effects were generally mild to moderate and short-lived, including fatigue, headache, and pain at the injection site. No serious safety concerns were observed.

The announcement came as the United States was recording more than 160,000 new coronavirus cases per day and hospitals in many states were approaching capacity. Health experts called the results a beacon of hope in what had been one of the darkest periods of the pandemic.